Incorporate feedback from authors june (and July) (#53)
DanNixon/sine2020_software_guidelines_paper: guidelines_for_collaborative_development_of_sustainable_data_treatment_software.tex

As a result the software is often expensive to develop.
Therefore, its imperative to ensure that the software will continue to be developed in the future, even if the current work force leaves the project.
Some of the requirements for sustainable software are for the code base to have a consistent quality and good documentation, to prevent a loss of knowledge.

> 

Reviewer: This is okay with me provided that we somehow manage to keep the seperation clear in the manus. I would consider to change the order since in the context of SINE2020 the generic ones are abstracted from the SINE2020 ones

> 

Reviewer 2: To me this is very clear, the entire report is generic apart from the section titles "SINE2020".

> 

Author: Could "The second set of guidelines are specific to the neutron and muon community and were " be changed to "The second set of guidelines are specific to the neutron and muon communities and the development of data treatment software within these communities. These were"

> This paper presents a set of guidelines with the purpose of helping potential contributors to develop maintainable data treatment software of a high quality which can easily be adapted by neutron and muon sources

Author: ```suggestion
A purpose of the presented guidelines is also to motivate that software is written in a way that makes it easier to use and adapt by neutron and muon sources
```

Author: The above is a suggestion to deleting this sentence, which I think is just trying to make the point this extra motivation for guidelines, but could alternative be mentioned out elsewhere

Reviewer 2: This sentence seem redundant given the above paragraph.

> The guidelines are developed and used in the course of a 4-year Pan-European project to facilitate collaborative development of inter-operable data treatment software among European neutron and muon sources

Author: ```suggestion
The specific guidelines were developed and used in the course of the 4-year European project to facilitate collaborative development of inter-operable data treatment software among European neutron and muon sources
```

Author: Above alternative suggestion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The specific guidelines were developed and used in the course of a 4-year European project to facilitate collaborative development of inter-operable data treatment software among European neutron and muon sources
```

These guidelines are specific, and over the course of the SINE2020 project helped to harmonize software development within this community

> Such specific guidelines should not be uncritically applied to the development of software within another community

Author: I strongly suggest not deleting this sentence since it is key to this paper, that is specific guidelines should NOT be uncritically applied elsewhere

> Such specific guidelines should not be uncritically applied to the development of software within another community

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Software outside of the neutron and muon data treatment communities can use the specific guidelines (TODO: section ref) as inspiration of how to apply the generic guidelines presented in this paper.
```

> Hence, for this reason this paper also presents more generic guidelines for scientific software development from which more specific guidelines applicable to a given community can be created

Author: Please don't just delete since it is key to the story of the paper as discussed

> Hence, for this reason this paper also presents more generic guidelines for scientific software development from which more specific guidelines applicable to a given community can be created

Reviewer 2: The above sentence says this.

It has become vital for modern neutron and muon sources to ensure that adequate user software is in existence not only for data acquisition but also for data treatment in order to ensure that the sources produce science rather than just data
The reason for this is at least two-fold 1) the demography of the users is changing from scientists building a career in neutron scattering or muon spectroscopy to scientists that consider neutron scattering and muon spectroscopy as tools among a broader set of tools and are thus not sufficient knowledgeable or skilled about the deeper details behind data treatment for neutron scattering or muon spectroscopy
Moreover, the users may simply not have the skills in how to analyse their data based on programs like MatLab, IDL, Python, or similar. 2) The advances in technology are leading to vast amounts of data that cannot be analysed by hand
For example, some instruments at the
European Spallation Source (ESS) are estimated to have data rates beyond [](TODO: Tobias’ paper) and at modern photon sources the situation is even more severe
This can be compared to the data rates from ten years ago, where ...(TODO: Historic example).

> With increasing data rates, the demand for performing ever more complex experiments increases as well as the need for more complex analysis techniques (e.g.\ based on machine learning techniques)

Author: ```suggestion
The growing complexity of both data reduction and analysis, means that the development of scientific software requires more resource.
```

Author: slight alternative suggestion for wording

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The growing complexity of both data reduction and analysis, means that the development of scientific software requires increasingly more resource.
```

\section{Introduction}
\label{Introduction}

> It has become vital for modern neutron and muon sources to ensure that adequate user software is in existence not only for data acquisition but also for data treatment in order to ensure that the sources produce science rather than just data

Reviewer: It is not exactly the same. The former describes (or was supposed to describe) a movement away from a situation where facilities only provided software for data acquisition to a new paradigm where they are required, or rather, would like to provide software for the full data pipeline in order to ensure that science is generated. This is for me a very important change; ten years ago WP10 would not had been promoted by the facilities. The new sentence only describes present situation and as written one may claim this was also true in the past.

> It has become vital for modern neutron and muon sources to ensure that adequate user software is in existence not only for data acquisition but also for data treatment in order to ensure that the sources produce science rather than just data

Reviewer 2: @thomasholmrod We have a new suggestion here.

> The reason for this is at least two-fold 1) the demography of the users is changing from scientists building a career in neutron scattering or muon spectroscopy to scientists that consider neutron scattering and muon spectroscopy as tools among a broader set of tools and are thus not sufficient knowledgeable or skilled about the deeper details behind data treatment for neutron scattering or muon spectroscopy

Reviewer: I think it needs to be elaborated a bit why the users are no longer expert users, perhaps: The typical user is no longer an expert in neutron scattering or muon spectroscopy but use these techniques in combination with other techniques.

> The reason for this is at least two-fold 1) the demography of the users is changing from scientists building a career in neutron scattering or muon spectroscopy to scientists that consider neutron scattering and muon spectroscopy as tools among a broader set of tools and are thus not sufficient knowledgeable or skilled about the deeper details behind data treatment for neutron scattering or muon spectroscopy

Reviewer 2: @thomasholmrod We have a new suggestion here.

> Moreover, the users may simply not have the skills in how to analyse their data based on programs like MatLab, IDL, Python, or similar. 2) The advances in technology are leading to vast amounts of data that cannot be analysed by hand

Reviewer: While this is also true, we have just abandoned the expert and there is also more scientists from other domains than physics (e.g. life science and cultural heritage, in some cases just called non-experts) who are not experienced in scripting. ESS was funded on the promise of supporting non-expert users. So there is more to it than the amount of data

> Moreover, the users may simply not have the skills in how to analyse their data based on programs like MatLab, IDL, Python, or similar. 2) The advances in technology are leading to vast amounts of data that cannot be analysed by hand

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The amount of data being produced is far greater than what can realistically be analysed by hand.
```

For example, some instruments at the

> European Spallation Source (ESS) are estimated to have data rates beyond [](TODO: Tobias’ paper) and at modern photon sources the situation is even more severe

Reviewer: the photon sources are here added due to a comment from Joachim I think. Agree that the wording is ugly. Perhaps ... and at modern photon sources the data rates are even (significantly) higher. Just to make it clear that we know that data rates at ESS are nothing special when considering the P&N sources as a whole. The reference is btw: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-0221/13/11/T11002/pdf

> European Spallation Source (ESS) are estimated to have data rates beyond [](TODO: Tobias’ paper) and at modern photon sources the situation is even more severe

Reviewer 2: Is this really relevant given that we are publishing in a neutron journal?

> This can be compared to the data rates ten years ago, where …(TODO: Historic example)

Reviewer: Sure :-)

> With increasing data rates, the demand for performing ever more complex experiments increases as well as the need for more complex analysis techniques (e.g.\ based on machine learning techniques)

Reviewer: Why is the complexity of data treatment increasing. I think perhaps that aspect is missing. Anders?

> The consequence of these aspects is that users inherently will depend on software developed by other developers typically at the facilities or in the user community, which in turn add significant requirements to quality, trustability, reliability and usability compared to when a developer develops software for herself or her colleague sitting next door

Reviewer: Many individuals and research groups continue to develop and maintain their own software, so it is still feasible, but many (most) users will rely on software from those individuals and groups (incl. at facilities) and hence the pressure for these developers to develop user-friendly, shareable and maintainable software increases.

> The consequence of these aspects is that users inherently will depend on software developed by other developers typically at the facilities or in the user community, which in turn add significant requirements to quality, trustability, reliability and usability compared to when a developer develops software for herself or her colleague sitting next door

Reviewer 2: But are those pieces of software developed, maintained and documented well?

I'm in no doubt that scientists/students/users/etc. can develop their own software when needed (in fact I'm very much in favor of them doing so), but I doubt it is feasible in most cases to provide a good level of documentation, support and testing above fixing it when it randomly breaks for their users.

> The consequence of these aspects is that users inherently will depend on software developed by other developers typically at the facilities or in the user community, which in turn add significant requirements to quality, trustability, reliability and usability compared to when a developer develops software for herself or her colleague sitting next door

Reviewer 2: The suggestion is now "high quality data treatment software" to make this clear.

\item user-friendly to facilitate the uptake of the software in the user community
\item extensible and facilitating contributions from third party developers to facilitate contributions from the user community partly to get additional resources but more importantly to nurse the incorporation of new methodologies developed in academia

\end{itemize}

The lack of guidelines can lead to the code being difficult to read, because the style will change depending on who wrote it
In the worst cases this can lead to people believing that the code is incorrect, when it is correct, hence leading to wasted effort
The other potential pitfalls with this isolated approach of software development is that bugs are less likely to be found, due to less users
Also the software may become too cumbersome to develop leading to the project having to start from scratch
Inherently, these factors make it more difficult to share and for other research groups or research infrastructures to adapt the software for their own purpose.
Guidelines for software development ensure that the code is of a high quality and that the project progress effectively

> A good set of guidelines will help the software be stable, inter-operable and extensible

Reviewer: Good

> Therefore, it will be easier to continue growing the code base to include new scientific analysis and techniques and to adapt the software for instance at other facilities that the one that developed the software in the first place

Reviewer: Agree

> Generic best practice guidelines exist for software development at large [] (TODO: add books probably), but guidelines for specific domains have also been suggested in the litterature [] (TODO: ) which are then tailored to their specific use cases

Reviewer: Miguel provided some useful references which are included in the newer feedback branch

The guidelines presented here are based on answers to a questionnaire to developers of data treatment software that are considered in SINE2020, namely Mantid, SasView, BornAgain, MuhRec / KipTool, and (TODO: full list) in addition to the ray-tracing programme McStas

> The environment and processes surrounding these software packages are quite different spanning from small teams, where guidelines are needed for getting the software adapted by a larger user community and for getting more developers involved to ensure the software’s continuous success, to larger teams of around 20 developers distributed across the world, where guidelines are needed to ensure a consistent quality across the code base

Reviewer: good

There are nonetheless so many commonalities that we have been able to develop guidelines specifically for this community

> Although the guidelines are aimed specifically for the neutron and muon community, the guidelines to a large extent reflects in our opinion what is common practice in data science

Reviewer: That's correct (or we can write it in this way). That being said I believe our choices of programming languates, etc. mimics those of data science (for good reason). Anyway, ok with me.

> Moreover, when it is appropriate the idea of the guideline will be abstracted so that an alternative can be chosen in the future

Reviewer: Fine

> We have made that choice because technology choices tend to be rather short lived

Reviewer: Good

> For instance, Python is today the de facto standard scripting language in scientific computing even though the first scientific python conference to the best of our knowledge was held as late as in 2002 with the scipy conference in Pasadena [] (TODO: ref and write something better.)

Reviewer: The newer feedback branch has the correct year and a good reference to an article that describes the development of Python in scientific computing

> For instance, Python is today the de facto standard scripting language in scientific computing even though the first scientific python conference to the best of our knowledge was held as late as in 2002 with the scipy conference in Pasadena [] (TODO: ref and write something better.)

Reviewer 3: we will have a look at it. We just felt that the above sentence did not add anything, with the extra information that is probably no longer true.

\section{SINE2020}
\label{SINE2020}

This section describes guidelines specific to the development of data treatment software for neutron and muon sources and its community.
As such they are not meant to be transferred uncritically to other communities or domains.

These specific guidelines were developed as part of the data treatment work package (WP 10) of Science and Innovation with Neutrons in Europe in 2020 (SINE2020).
This was a 4-year project between 18 partner institutions spread across 12 different countries.
This work package’s first deliverable (D10.1) was to put together the standard and guidelines for the development of software relevant to it and its community with the purpose of facilitating collaborative development and inter-operable software.
The primary mechanism by which this was achieved was by collecting information from existing authors of data treatment software and from this distill guidelines and agree on these.

The output of this work is described in section 2 of the technical report: \cite{sine2020_wp10_d10_report}.

> This report contains statistics and information about neutron and muon data treatment software including tables identifying commonality.

Author: Can the above be changed to "This report collected statistics and information about how the participating software were developed."

It is incorrect to write "implemented these guidelines" here

> This report contains statistics and information about neutron and muon data treatment software including tables identifying commonality.

Reviewer 2: Whilst I have no strong opinion here I believe "implemented these guidelines" is reasonable to say given that the premise of this paper is presenting guidelines that have been derived from the participating software projects.

If they have not implemented these guidelines (or at least a subset of them) then the premise behind the paper falls down and this is just presenting guidelines with a small reference to SINE2020.

@AnthonyLim23 I think this was your line, do you have any thoughts?

> This report contains statistics and information about neutron and muon data treatment software including tables identifying commonality.

Reviewer 3: I think to say how it was "developed" may not have the intended meaning, as it does not necessarily correspond to any of the guidelines. It could give the impression of how the software changed over time. Would "used guidelines" be more acceptable?

> This report contains statistics and information about neutron and muon data treatment software including tables identifying commonality.

Reviewer 2: We changed "implemented" to "used" as it no longer implies effort.

This report contains statistics and information about neutron and muon data treatment software including tables identifying commonality.
The guidelines are designed to be specific enough to ensure commonality between different pieces of software, but sufficiently abstract to not be restrictive.
The main guidelines are presented below with references to the relevant section of this paper for further reading.

\begin{itemize}
      \item Use an Open Source license, such as GPL.
      \item Support multiple operation systems.
      \item Design software to be modular.
      \item Use the programming languages C++ and/or Python.
      \item Where the software uses a GUI, use Qt.
      \item Support loading of NeXus/HDF5 data formats where such exists.
      \item Use Git for version control of source code including for user and developer documentation.
      \item Use a issue/ticketing system; such as Github issues.
      \item Use a tool for continuous integration and automated testing; such as Travis-CI and Jenkins
      \item Follow a coding standard and use tools that enforces this; such as Pylint (Python) and ClangFormat (C++).
\end{itemize}

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\begin{sidewaystable}[]
 \begin{tabular}{llllll}
 Software                        & BornAgain \cite{}  & Mantid \cite{} &McStats \cite{}  &MuhRec \cite{} & SasView \cite{} \\
 Age of project (years)          & 9 & 11 & 21 & 10 & 15 \\
 Number of developers (full time)& 3 & 20 & 5 & 2 & 2-20 \\
 Developer locations             & 1 & >4 & TODO & 1 & TODO \\
 License                         & GPLv3 & GPLv3 & GPLv2 & GPLv3 & BSD \\
 Governance model                & None & PMB \& AC  & None & AC & PMB \\
 Release cycles (per year)       & a few & 3 & 1 & 1 & 1\\
 User documentation              & Tutorials. Examples. & Manual. Tutorials. & Manual. & Manual. & Manual. Tutorials.
 \end{tabular}
 \caption{An updated summary of how guidelines were applied to the different software projects from SINE200 \cite{} (TODO: ref paper). The number of guidelines implemented increases with the size
and scope of the project. PMB = Project Management Board. AC = Advisory Committee}
\label{summaryTable}
\end{sidewaystable}
  
The statistics of how guidelines could be applied to software projects are presented in table \ref{summaryTable}.
Some of the projects have a large numbers of developers and/or based at multiple locations. 
As a result the management overheads (e.g. project management boards) are greater to ensure a uniform standard across the project. 
The projects with less developers tend to have less management overheads as it is easier to make decisions across the whole team.
This is a good example of how guidelines should be adapted to match the needs of the project.

```

Reviewer 3: @Anders-Markvardsen is this better?

Author: @AnthonyLim23 OK. Note there remain TODOs in the table

This report contains statistics and information about neutron and muon data treatment software including tables identifying commonality.
Below is listed the main specific guidelines agreed and used with effect throughout the SINE2020 project to stimulate stronger collaboration,
commonality, cohesion and move towards using better software engineering best practices for software where this was not already in use: 

\begin{itemize}
      \item Use an Open Source license, such as GPL.
      \item Support multiple operation systems.
      \item Design software to be modular.
      \item Use the programming languages C++ and/or Python.
      \item Where the software uses a GUI, use Qt.
      \item Support loading of NeXus/HDF5 data formats where such exists.
      \item Use Git for version control of source code including for user and developer documentation.
      \item Use a issue/ticketing system; such as Github issues.
      \item Use a tool for continuous integration and automated testing; such as Travis-CI and Jenkins
      \item Follow a coding standard and use tools that enforces this; such as Pylint (Python) and ClangFormat (C++).
\end{itemize}

> 

Author: I strongly suggest changing " A summary of the main findings from the report \cite{} (TODO add) are presented in table \ref{summaryTable}. The larger projects, Mantid \cite{} and SasView \cite{} have more rigorous guidelines for their projects. For example, they both have project management boards to decide the direction of the project. Whereas the smaller project do not need the overheads of a large project management structure. This is a good example of how guidelines should be adapted to match the needs of the project"

to something like this:

" Some characteristics of software projects studied in the report \cite{} (TODO add) are presented in table \ref{summaryTable}. This is a snapshot of software at the time of the report. The table shows some correlation between the number of developers working on a project and how it is managed and steered, and illustrates how guidelines should be adapted to match the needs of the project"

Note, the evidence in the table for "correction between the number of developers working on a project and how it is managed and steering" is in my opinion weak and it is wrong to state, from this table, that some projects apply more rigorous guidelines than others
